Centericq. Documentation.

Contents
--------

1. Introduction
    1.1. Creation history
    1.2. Features overview
2. UIN registration
3. User interface
    3.1. The ESC key
    3.2. The main screen
    3.3. Menus
    3.4. Dialogs
4. Configuration
    4.1. Migrating from other ICQ software
    4.2. Event sounds
    4.3. URL open action (web browser support)
5. Online status
    5.1. "Auto Away" and "Auto N/A"
6. Contact list
    6.1. Finding and adding users
        6.1.1. Some useful hints
    6.2. Removing users
    6.3. Users' details
    6.4. Groups of contacts
7. Sending and receiving events
    7.1. Messages
    7.2. URLs
    7.3. Contacts
    7.4. Files
    7.5. Events history
8. Ignore, visible and invisible lists
    8.1. Ignore list
    8.2. Visible list
    8.3. Invisible list
9. Advanced features
    9.1. Arabic and Hebrew languages support
    9.2. Protocol debug mode
10. Lynx
    10.1. The program homepage
    10.2. Konst.org.ua
    10.3. Other programs I write
    10.4. ICQ


1. Introduction
---------------

  Centericq is a text mode menu- and window-driven ICQ interface. It
allows you to send, receive, and forward messages, URLs and, contacts,
mass message send, search for users (including extended "whitepages
search"), view users' details, maintain your contact list directly from
the program (including non-icq contacts), view the messages history,
register a new UIN and update your details, be informed on receiving
email messages, automatically set away after the defined period of
inactivity (on any console), and have your own ignore, visible and
invisible lists. It can also associate events with sounds, has support
for Hebrew and Arabic languages and allows to arrange contacts into
groups.

  Centericq is known to build and work well under Linux, FreeBSD,
OpenBSD and NetBSD.


1.1. Creation history
---------------------

  This program was written because of a very simple cause. I just
couldn't find any console based ICQ clients with really useful user
interface. When I started it I had quite a slow computer at home. Having
X window running on it took incredibly a lot of resources making whole
the system really slow. I didn't like an idea of launching it just to be
on ICQ, but there were several good programs only for X. For console
they had only mICQ and zicq. The former was ok, but its interface made
me cry. I know, it's of quite a UNIX style, and I don't have anything
against command line, but typing nicks and uins all the time was
terrible. The second thingie, zicq, was an attempt to implement menus
and windows for ICQ in text-mode, but its author couldn't go further
than just splitting the screen into two windows, one with contact list
and another with usual mICQ output :) Actually it was all based on mICQ
code. I don't wanna say mICQ was bad, for it was the first ICQ client
for Linux, and its author made a great job exploring and sniffing the
ICQ protocol.

  After looking at freshmeat and some "icq for linux" pages the hope to
find something worth was finally lost. I decided to put some effort into
making a program which would be really useful for me. It took me about
two weeks to write and then 1 week to test before releasing the first
version.

  Since that time the software suffered a lot of changes, including
rewrite resulted into the version 3.0.0. Now I'm continuing to develop
it, going the standard way of adding new features and fixing bugs. And
feedback from users helps me a lot in it.


1.2. Features overview
----------------------

  Centericq has almost all the functionality including extended issues
that Mirabilis client have. Now it's one of the most full-featured
clients for UNIX.

  Beside simple things like sending and receiving messages, changing
online status and basic user information, centericq has such advanced
features like "White pages" search, an ability to update almost all the
fields in user's details, send URL, files, contacts, etc. I hope you
enjoy it a lot :)


2. UIN registration
-------------------

  To be able to use ICQ you should have a UIN (I think it stands for
something like "user identification number"). When you start centericq
for the first time the registration dialog appears. You can either use
an already existing UIN or register a new one. Actually, all the fields
the dialog has are self-descriptive. Some attention should only be paid
to the "server address" field. The default value it has is quite ok. In
the majority of cases you do not need to change it. The only exception
is if you have your own ICQ server on LAN. I received quite a bunch of
"bug-reports" saying that centericq didn't work with "login.icq.com"
server. No wonder it didn't. Erm, I would be quite surprised if it did
:) The point is that login.icq.com is used for new Mirabilis client
software which uses a new version of the protocol.

  Russian speaking users should pay attention to the "Russian
translation" item of the registration dialog. It's vital to set its
value to "yes" to be able to use cyrillic. In most cases. Unless you use
win1251 as a default charset, about what I doubt a lot :) Unfortunatelly
we have two different encodings for our language, koi8-r is default for
UNIX like systems and win1251 is used in Windows. Since ICQ comes from
Windows we need to recode every sent and received message in order for
it to be readable.


3. User interface
-----------------

  The text UI centericq has, as well as UI of other programs for console
I have written, is very simple. There are menus, windows, menus and
input lines. In the bottom line of the screen there is a status bar. It
usually contains hints about what to press to invoke various menus,
dialogs, and perform various actions.


3.1. The ESC key
----------------

  This key is used for termination of input, if you wanna cancel the
operation you wanted to perform. Say, if "send message" operation is
chosen (invoked just with a press of "Enter" on a contact), an editor
window appears. As status bar says, you can use "Ctrl-X" to send it, and
ESC to cancel. The only hint is that you have to press the ESC key
twice. It's a common practice for console based UNIX programs (Midnight
commander is a good example), because checking for only one ESC would
spoil arrow key processing. The point is that they have correspond
sequences that start with an ASCII#27 character which is actually ESC.


3.2. The main screen
--------------------

  The main screen of centericq consists of three parts. First is contact
list which is situated to the left. Next is information window which is
used to show received events, users' details, and also to edit events
that are going to be sent. And the smallest one is a log window in which
you can see messages about what centericq is doing right now.


3.3. Menus
----------

  No need to say, menus is a common way to provide a user with an
ability to select one (or several) items from a certain list. To make a
difference between single and multiple choice menu you gotta just have a
look at the items. If square brackets stand next to items text in every
line, a multiple selection is requested. Otherwise you can only select
one item. To do it, just press "Enter" on it. To make a mutiple
selection, press "Space" on items and use "Enter" to finish the
selection. ESC does also work in all menus to cancel the selection.


3.4. Dialogs
------------

  Every dialog in centericq has a tree-like view. When I was about to
write classes for form-based input, I remembered that there was a
"treeview" class written by me before. So, I decided to use it for
dialogs and was right. There was no need to re-design the whole form in
case I need to add some controls, or so. I just add it as a node or a
leaf it scrolls, and nothing gets spoiled. Everything really nice is
always simple :)


4. Configuration
----------------

  The major parts of centericq settings can be found in the
"Configuration" dialog which can be invoked by selecting an appropriate
items in the global menu (the one you see on pressing F4). There are
only three things you should setup from outside the program with
modifying the program's configuration files. They are event sounds,
actions (see below) and color schemes.

  With the "Configuration" dialog you can turn on and off various
features, as well as change the ICQ server address and adjust network
settings. All the items there are self-explanatory and their meaning is
quite obvious. I suppose the program users are usually not dumb :) so I
won't cover all of the items here in the documentation.


4.1. Migrating from other ICQ software
--------------------------------------

  If you decided to migrate to centericq from another ICQ software or
have a need to you something else in parallel, there is a way to convert
the contact list. This means you can migrate without loosing your
contacts and history.

  How to do it? There is a perl script named cicqconv. It's usually
installed on "make install" under @prefix@/bin (/usr/local/bin in the
majority of cases). Its usage is very simple. You should only pass one
parameter to it, telling from what kind of ICQ software it's to convert
your data. To see the list of supported software, run the script without
parameters.


4.2. Event sounds
-----------------

  As it was said before, centericq can play sounds on various events.
It's done the following way. Upon, say, receiving a message, centericq
executes an external command. Actually it can be whatever you want, but
original idea is to execute a command line WAV player.

  There are three WAV sound files which centericq has by default. They
are sounds taken from Mirabilis ICQ. When you set "Change sound device
to" item to "sound card", the program generates a file named sounds in
the .centericq/ directory in your home folder. The default file has
commands to execute a "play" utility (from sox package) with a name of a
file to play, one of the default ones. If you wanna change the player or
a sound simply edit ~/.centericq/sounds.

  If you use ESD (Enlightenment Sound Daemon) to have some extra sound
facilities such as mixing streams, or playing on another computer, you
might wish to change the "play" command to "esdplay".


4.3. URL open action (web browser support)
------------------------------------------

  Centericq can extract URLs from messages and user information records
for you. And it also can launch your preferred web browser to view them.
No need to have a big attention to notice "F2 to URLs" text in the
status bar when you view either a message or user's details. The "open
URL" action starts right after you make a selection in the menu invoked.
The ~/.centericq/actions file is responsible for this. By default it has
a command to execute netscape, but you can change to whatever you want.
Please only note that you cannot put lynx or any other text mode based
browser starting in the same console there. The commands from "actions"
run in parallel with centericq, so please only pass your URLs to scripts
or to X based browsers, but to nothing interactive.


5. Online status
----------------

  With centericq you can be either on or off the ICQ network. The status
can be changed with the "Status" menu invoked either with F3 or "S" key
or from the global menu. It provides you with a choice to switch between
online statuses along with an ability to go offline. If one of online
statuses if selected when you're offline, centericq will connect and
switch the status to what was chosen.

  With an online status you can indicate to those who are in touch with
you your being away, occupied, free for chat, not available, etc.


5.1. "Auto Away" and "Auto N/A"
-------------------------------

  Also there is a way to switch status to Away and N/A (not available)
after a certain period of inactivity, to show your friends or colleagues
you're somewhere away from computer.

  The very useful thing about is that centericq detects inactivity for
all the consoles if you use it locally. So it won't change your status
if you're just working in another console and only don't tweak it.

  The auto periods can be changed with the "Configuration" dialog. Zero
value means the feature is off.


6. Contact list
---------------

  The list of your contacts is displayed to the left on the centericq
main screen, and has a tree-like structure. There are "Online" and,
unless the "Hide offline users" options is on, "Offline" nodes. Also it
always has an item named "ICQ" which is used to receive various system
messages, such as authorization requests, "you were added" messages, and
so on.


6.1. Finding and adding users
-----------------------------

6.1.1. Some useful hints
------------------------

6.2. Removing users
-------------------

6.3. Users' details
-------------------

6.4. Groups of contacts
-----------------------
